README.md, before:

## Local testing of apps

These are some of the required steps, tips, and tricks when it comes to running an app on a local machine. The primary goal is to be able to iterate over changes and verifying them without needing to deploy the app to the test environment.

- [Prerequisites](#prerequisites)
- [Setup](#setup)
- [Changing test data](#changing-test-data)

### Prerequisites

1. Newest [.NET 6 SDK](https://dotnet.microsoft.com/download/dotnet/6.0)
2. Newest [Git](https://git-scm.com/downloads)
3. A code editor - we like [Visual Studio Code](https://code.visualstudio.com/Download)
    - Also
      install [recommended extensions](https://code.visualstudio.com/docs/editor/extension-gallery#_workspace-recommended-extensions) (
      f.ex. [C#](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=ms-vscode.csharp))
4. [Docker Desktop](https://www.docker.com/products/docker-desktop) (Linux users can also use native Docker)

### Setup

#### Using docker 

1. Clone the `app-localtest` repository to a local folder and move into the folder.

   ```shell
   git clone https://github.com/Altinn/app-localtest
   cd app-localtest
   ```

2. Build and run the containers in the background. 

    ```shell
    docker compose up -d --build
    ```

   :information_source: If you are using linux or mac you can use the Makefile to build and run the containers.

    ```shell
    make docker-start-localtest
    ```
   
    This mode supports running one app at a time. If you need to run multiple apps at once, stop the localtest container with `docker stop localtest` and follow the instructions below to run LocalTest locally outside Docker.

3. Start your app
    _This step requires that you have already [created an app](https://docs.altinn.studio/app/getting-started/create-app/), added a [data model](https://docs.altinn.studio/app/development/data/data-model/data-models-tool/), and [cloned the app](https://docs.altinn.studio/app/getting-started/local-dev/) to your local environment._
  
    Move into the `App` folder of your application.

     Example: If your application is named `my-awesome-app` and is located in the folder `C:\my_applications`, run the following command:

    ```shell
    cd C:\my_applications\my-awasome-app\App
    ```

     Run the application:

     ```shell
     dotnet run
    ```

#### Using podman

1. Clone the `app-localtest` repository to a local folder and move into the folder.

   ```shell
   git clone https://github.com/Altinn/app-localtest
   cd app-localtest
   ```

2. Build and run the containers in the background.

    ```shell
    podman compose --file podman-compose.yml up -d --build
    ```

   :information_source: If you are using linux or mac you can use the Makefile to build and run the containers.

   ```shell
   make podman-start-localtest
   ```

   This mode supports running one app at a time. If you need to run multiple apps at once, stop the localtest container with `podman stop localtest` and follow the instructions below to run LocalTest locally outside Docker.

3. Start your app
   _This step requires that you have already [created an app](https://docs.altinn.studio/app/getting-started/create-app/), added a [data model](https://docs.altinn.studio/app/development/data/data-model/data-models-tool/), and [cloned the app](https://docs.altinn.studio/app/getting-started/local-dev/) to your local environment._

   Move into the `App` folder of your application.

   Example: If your application is named `my-awesome-app` and is located in the folder `C:\my_applications`, run the following command:

    ```shell
    cd C:\my_applications\my-awasome-app\App
    ```

   Run the application:

     ```shell
     dotnet run
    ```

The app and local platform services are now running locally. The app can be accessed on <http://local.altinn.cloud>.

Log in with a test user, using your app name and org name. This will redirect you to the app.

### Changing configuration

The Docker Compose config can be changed with local environment variables. There is a
template file for the `.env` file [here](./.env.template), rename it to `.env` and
uncomment some variables that you want different values for.

Sometimes the local environment have another service running on port 80, so you might need to change this.

```dotenv
ALTINN3LOCAL_PORT=80
```

If you want to see the storage files on disk (instead of reading them through the browser), change this to a local
path on your computer (ensure that it exists)

```dotenv
ALTINN3LOCALSTORAGE_PATH=C:/AltinnPlatformLocal/
```

If you want to use another domain than `local.altinn.cloud` for local testing you could do that this way:

```dotenv
TEST_DOMAIN=local.altinn.cloud
```

### Multiple apps at the same time (running LocalTest locally)

The setup described above (LocalTest running in Docker) currently only supports one app at a time. If you find
yourself needing to run multiple apps at the same time, or if you need to debug or develop LocalTest, a local setup is
preferred.

:information_source: If you're already running LocalTest in Docker, be sure to stop the container with `docker stop localtest`

**Configuration of LocalTest**
The LocalTest application acts as an emulator of the Altinn 3 platform services. It provides things like authentication,
authorization and storage. Everything your apps will need to run locally.

Settings (under `LocalPlatformSettings`):

- `LocalAppMode` - (default `file`) If set to `http`, LocalTest will find the active app configuration and policy.xml
  using apis exposed on `LocalAppUrl`. (note that this is a new setting needs to be added manually under
  `LocalPlatformSettings`, it might also require updates to altinn dependencies for your apps in order to support
  this functionality)
- `LocalAppUrl` - If `LocalAppMode` == `"http"`, this URL will be used instead of `AppRepositoryBasePath` to find apps
  and their files. Typically the value will be `"http://localhost:5005"`
- `LocalTestingStorageBasePath` - The folder to which LocalTest will store instances and data being created
  during testing.
- `AppRepositoryBasePath` - The folder where LocalTest will look for apps and their files
  if `LocalAppMode` == `"file"`. This is typically the parent directory where you checkout all your apps.
- `LocalTestingStaticTestDataPath` - Test user data like profile, register and
  roles. (`<path to altinn-studio repo>/testdata/`)

The recommended way of changing settings for LocalTest is through
[user-secrets](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/aspnet/core/security/app-secrets?view=aspnetcore-6.0&tabs=windows#set-a-secret).
User secrets is a set of developer specific settings that will overwrite values from the `appsettings.json` file when
the application is started in developer "mode". The alternative is to edit the `appsettings.json` file directly. Just be
careful not to commit developer specific changes back to the repository.

- Define a user secret with the following command:  (make sure you are in the LocalTest folder)
   ```bash
   dotnet user-secrets set "LocalPlatformSettings:AppRepositoryBasePath" "C:\Repos"
   ```
  Run the command for each setting you want to change.
- Alternatively edit the appsettings.json file directly:
    - Open `appsettings.json` in the `LocalTest` folder in an editor, for example in Visual Studio Code
    - Change the setting `"AppRepsitoryBasePath"` to the full path to your app on the disk.
    - Change other settings as needed.
    - Save the file.

Finally, start the local platform services (make sure you are in the `/src` folder)

```bash
cd /src
dotnet run
```

### Changing test data

In some cases your application might differ from the default setup and require custom changes to the test data
available.
This section contains the most common changes.

#### Add a missing role for a test user

This would be required if your app requires a role which none of the test users have.

1. Identify the role list you need to modify by noting the userId of the user representing an entity, and the partyId of
   the entity you want to represent
2. Find the correct `roles.json` file in `testdata/authorization/roles` by navigating
   to `User_{userID}\party_{partyId}\roles.json`
3. Add a new entry in the list for the role you require

  ```
  {
    "Type": "altinn",
    "value": "[Insert role code here]"
  }
  ```

4. Save and close the file
5. Restart LocalTest

Commit message:

Add updated readme for podman and add a hack for resolving the bind issues on mac

README.md, after:

## Local testing of apps

These are some of the required steps, tips, and tricks when it comes to running an app on a local machine. The primary goal is to be able to iterate over changes and verifying them without needing to deploy the app to the test environment.

- [Prerequisites](#prerequisites)
- [Setup](#setup)
- [Changing test data](#changing-test-data)

### Prerequisites

1. Newest [.NET 6 SDK](https://dotnet.microsoft.com/download/dotnet/6.0)
2. Newest [Git](https://git-scm.com/downloads)
3. A code editor - we like [Visual Studio Code](https://code.visualstudio.com/Download)
    - Also
      install [recommended extensions](https://code.visualstudio.com/docs/editor/extension-gallery#_workspace-recommended-extensions) (
      f.ex. [C#](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=ms-vscode.csharp))
4. [Docker Desktop](https://www.docker.com/products/docker-desktop) (possible licencing fee) or [Podman](https://podman.io)/[Podman Desktop](https://podman-desktop.io) (Linux users can also use native Docker)

### Setup

#### Using docker 

1. Clone the `app-localtest` repository to a local folder and move into the folder.

   ```shell
   git clone https://github.com/Altinn/app-localtest
   cd app-localtest
   ```

2. Build and run the containers in the background. 

    ```shell
    docker compose up -d --build
    ```

   :information_source: If you are using linux or mac you can use the Makefile to build and run the containers.

    ```shell
    make docker-start-localtest
    ```
   
    This mode supports running one app at a time. If you need to run multiple apps at once, stop the localtest container with `docker stop localtest` and follow the instructions below to run LocalTest locally outside Docker.

3. Start your app
    _This step requires that you have already [created an app](https://docs.altinn.studio/app/getting-started/create-app/), added a [data model](https://docs.altinn.studio/app/development/data/data-model/data-models-tool/), and [cloned the app](https://docs.altinn.studio/app/getting-started/local-dev/) to your local environment._
  
    Move into the `App` folder of your application.

     Example: If your application is named `my-awesome-app` and is located in the folder `C:\my_applications`, run the following command:

    ```shell
    cd C:\my_applications\my-awasome-app\App
    ```

     Run the application:

     ```shell
     dotnet run
    ```

#### Using podman

1. Clone the `app-localtest` repository to a local folder and move into the folder.

   ```shell
   git clone https://github.com/Altinn/app-localtest
   cd app-localtest
   ```

2. Build and run the containers in the background.

    If you are using an mac with either a M2 or M3 chip you may need to use `applehv` instead of `qemu` as the podman machine driver. 
    This can be done by setting the environment variable `PODMAN_MACHINE_DRIVER` to `applehv` before running the command below.
    If you are using Podman Desktop you also need to add these lines in `~/.config/containers/containers.conf` (check if the `[machine]` section already exists):
    ```
    [machine]
      provider = "applehv"
    ```
   
    
    ```shell
    podman compose --file podman-compose.yml up -d --build
    ```

   :information_source: If you are using linux or mac you can use the Makefile to build and run the containers.

   ```shell
   make podman-start-localtest
   ```

   :warning_source: Are you running podman version < 4.7.0 you need to use the following command instead:

    ```shell
   podman-compose --file podman-compose.yml up -d --build
   ```
   
    or the make command:

    ```shell
   make podman-compose-start-localtest
   ```

   This mode supports running one app at a time. If you need to run multiple apps at once, stop the localtest container with `podman stop localtest` and follow the instructions below to run LocalTest locally outside Docker.

3. Start your app
   _This step requires that you have already [created an app](https://docs.altinn.studio/app/getting-started/create-app/), added a [data model](https://docs.altinn.studio/app/development/data/data-model/data-models-tool/), and [cloned the app](https://docs.altinn.studio/app/getting-started/local-dev/) to your local environment._

   Move into the `App` folder of your application.

   Example: If your application is named `my-awesome-app` and is located in the folder `C:\my_applications`, run the following command:

    ```shell
    cd C:\my_applications\my-awasome-app\App
    ```

   Run the application:

     ```shell
     dotnet run
    ```

The app and local platform services are now running locally. The app can be accessed on <http://local.altinn.cloud>.

Log in with a test user, using your app name and org name. This will redirect you to the app.

### Changing configuration

The Docker Compose config can be changed with local environment variables. There is a
template file for the `.env` file [here](./.env.template), rename it to `.env` and
uncomment some variables that you want different values for.

Sometimes the local environment have another service running on port 80, so you might need to change this.

```dotenv
ALTINN3LOCAL_PORT=80
```

If you want to see the storage files on disk (instead of reading them through the browser), change this to a local
path on your computer (ensure that it exists)

```dotenv
ALTINN3LOCALSTORAGE_PATH=C:/AltinnPlatformLocal/
```

If you want to use another domain than `local.altinn.cloud` for local testing you could do that this way:

```dotenv
TEST_DOMAIN=local.altinn.cloud
```

### Multiple apps at the same time (running LocalTest locally)

The setup described above (LocalTest running in Docker) currently only supports one app at a time. If you find
yourself needing to run multiple apps at the same time, or if you need to debug or develop LocalTest, a local setup is
preferred.

:information_source: If you're already running LocalTest in Docker, be sure to stop the container with `docker stop localtest`

**Configuration of LocalTest**
The LocalTest application acts as an emulator of the Altinn 3 platform services. It provides things like authentication,
authorization and storage. Everything your apps will need to run locally.

Settings (under `LocalPlatformSettings`):

- `LocalAppMode` - (default `file`) If set to `http`, LocalTest will find the active app configuration and policy.xml
  using apis exposed on `LocalAppUrl`. (note that this is a new setting needs to be added manually under
  `LocalPlatformSettings`, it might also require updates to altinn dependencies for your apps in order to support
  this functionality)
- `LocalAppUrl` - If `LocalAppMode` == `"http"`, this URL will be used instead of `AppRepositoryBasePath` to find apps
  and their files. Typically the value will be `"http://localhost:5005"`
- `LocalTestingStorageBasePath` - The folder to which LocalTest will store instances and data being created
  during testing.
- `AppRepositoryBasePath` - The folder where LocalTest will look for apps and their files
  if `LocalAppMode` == `"file"`. This is typically the parent directory where you checkout all your apps.
- `LocalTestingStaticTestDataPath` - Test user data like profile, register and
  roles. (`<path to altinn-studio repo>/testdata/`)

The recommended way of changing settings for LocalTest is through
[user-secrets](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/aspnet/core/security/app-secrets?view=aspnetcore-6.0&tabs=windows#set-a-secret).
User secrets is a set of developer specific settings that will overwrite values from the `appsettings.json` file when
the application is started in developer "mode". The alternative is to edit the `appsettings.json` file directly. Just be
careful not to commit developer specific changes back to the repository.

- Define a user secret with the following command:  (make sure you are in the LocalTest folder)
   ```bash
   dotnet user-secrets set "LocalPlatformSettings:AppRepositoryBasePath" "C:\Repos"
   ```
  Run the command for each setting you want to change.
- Alternatively edit the appsettings.json file directly:
    - Open `appsettings.json` in the `LocalTest` folder in an editor, for example in Visual Studio Code
    - Change the setting `"AppRepsitoryBasePath"` to the full path to your app on the disk.
    - Change other settings as needed.
    - Save the file.

Finally, start the local platform services (make sure you are in the `/src` folder)

```bash
cd /src
dotnet run
```

### Changing test data

In some cases your application might differ from the default setup and require custom changes to the test data
available.
This section contains the most common changes.

#### Add a missing role for a test user

This would be required if your app requires a role which none of the test users have.

1. Identify the role list you need to modify by noting the userId of the user representing an entity, and the partyId of
   the entity you want to represent
2. Find the correct `roles.json` file in `testdata/authorization/roles` by navigating
   to `User_{userID}\party_{partyId}\roles.json`
3. Add a new entry in the list for the role you require

  ```
  {
    "Type": "altinn",
    "value": "[Insert role code here]"
  }
  ```

4. Save and close the file
5. Restart LocalTest
